it's 7 30. here's callum leslie
nasa's having a go at launching a
helicopter on mars this morning
it would be the first ever controlled
flight on another planet it's going to
try and take some photos
so in case you've been living under a
rock for the past two months
nasa's perseverance rover landed on mars
two months ago in february 2021 and it
took with it
a small helicopter essentially a drone
called ingenuity to try and prove that
flight on another planet
would be possible now since landing
ingenuity has been deployed to the
surface from the underside of the
perseverance rover
where it sort of been safely stowed
during travel and nasa have confirmed
that they could communicate with it that
it's been able to charge itself with its
solar panels and
unlock and spin its rotor blades now
there were a few issues with that
initial test of the rotor blades
actually spinning up there was a glitch
in the software program that caused the
whole thing to just sort of auto
shut off for safety so they had to
rewrite the software
upload the new version to ingenuity and
that delayed this first flight by about
a week or so hence why this wasn't in my
night sky news video
from last week but today it's happening
and this
is a big deal not least because we don't
even know if powered flight on mars is
going to be possible ingenuity was
literally launched on perseverance not
knowing whether it would be able to take
off from the ground
and that's because the martian
atmosphere is so much thinner than earth
so it's
one percent of the atmospheric density
of earth at sea levels that's a hundred
times
less dense for context if you were to go
to the summit of mount everest instead
the atmosphere would be three times less
dense
to reach sort of martian density of
atmosphere here on earth you would have
to go
to 45 kilometers altitude which is about
four
times higher than passenger airplanes
fly
so why does it even matter that mars's
atmosphere is thin well it's all to do
with how helicopters fly right they fly
by spinning their rotor blades now rotor
blades are
flat on the bottom and curved along the
top and so what that means is the air
has to flow faster over the top than it
does over the bottom to compensate
for the longer path that it has to take
now if the speed of air goes up
then the pressure of the air goes down
that's a really well-known law of
physics called bernoulli's principle
now if the pressure is different if it's
greater on the bottom
and less on the top where the air is
moving faster you essentially create
like a
suction because of the pressure
difference we create is something known
as
lift essentially a force that helps lift
the helicopter
off the ground as its rotor blades spin
so it can rise into the air and fly
now there's a couple of things you have
to think about here because obviously
the heavier the thing
is that you're trying to fly then you're
gonna have to generate more lift
either by rotating your blades faster to
generate more lift or by having
bigger blades now for example on a
typical helicopter the blades spin about
500 times per minute right but on a
typical consumer drone that's used
photography where the blades are really
tiny the blades spin it 8 000 times a
minute just to give it enough
lift now on mars is obviously a lot of
things different first of all you've got
slightly less gravity so that makes
things slightly easier but then the
thinner atmosphere means that you can't
generate as much
lift because you literally don't have
the pressure from as many air molecules
generating that lift below your rotor
blades so even though ingenuity is about
the same weight is it typical consumer
drone
about 1.8 kilos it even looks a little
bit like one right it has to have
two pairs of rotor blades both of which
are 1.2
meters long as opposed to the tiny ones
that you get on drones here on earth
and it needs to spin it 2500 times a
minute
in opposite directions to generate
enough
lift 500 times
a minute as opposed to like normal giant
helicopters that can lift people here on
earth which the blades only have to spin
at 500 times
a minute or at least this is how fast we
think
the blades have to spin this has never
been done before and although nasa has
done all the maths and put the best
engineers on the job to do all the tests
that they can think of at least in
earth's gravity with thinner atmosphere
we still
don't know whether this is going to work
we really want it to work though because
if it does it would completely
revolutionize the way that we explore
objects in our solar system right a
drone
can help scope out areas that a rover
should go and explore in more detail and
take samples
from it can get to places that rovers
can't as well like
caves and it can give us a closer look
at things that we've seen that look
really interesting from say satellite
pictures
as well plus it helps pave the way for
future drone and helicopter missions too
like
dragonfly nasa's ambitious mission to
send a drone to the surface of saturn's
largest moon
titan the place in the solar system that
we think is the most likely to have the
right conditions
for life so everybody has their fingers
crossed for today's
flight essentially the plan is for
ingenuity to hover about
three meters off the ground for about 30
seconds or so before touching down
again that might not sound very
impressive for a first flight but it's
worth remembering that the
wright brothers first fight here on
earth which everyone has been sort of
comparing this moment on mars at two
only lasted for 12 seconds and then they
cracked on and
did more fights after that after that
sort of first proof of concept and
that's what nasa's plan is
after this first flight today if it's
successful it might also instruct
ingenuity to do a couple more different
fights second and a third one
where it might go a little bit further
afield by about 50 meters
or so and then come back again and land
during all this ingenuity has two
cameras to record what's going on one of
them looks
straight down to the surface it's a
little black and white science camera
and then the second one is
sort of like a horizon shot right
looking out as a traditional drone might
do
plus you've got all the cameras on the
perseverance rover too which we parked
about 65 meters away
for the best view of what's going on now
technically all of the commands and the
timings
for this whole procedure of takeoff and
hover and landing and making sure that
all the images are taken at the right
time by both ingenuity and perseverance
as well
all those commands were sent by nasa
last night to mars
and so technically the fight has
actually already happened at
8 30 my time we just don't know whether
it was a success or not yet we're in
that sort of waiting period time where
the data
is coming off ingenuity and perseverance
up to the satellites in orbit around
mars back to the deep space radio
network dishes on earth
and then relayed to nasa and
that takes about three hours or so so
we're still about an
hour-ish away from getting
data and knowing whether this fight was
successful or not so
right now i just i'm sat here with my
fingers crossed
trying to be patient and patience
it's not my strong suit one eternity
later
oh it's happening oh something's
happening something's happening
so at the minute we're just waiting to
hear from one member of the team
and the first piece of data that's going
to come through is essentially a graph
to say
this was the altitude of ingenuity over
this time period and that'll tell them
actually if they managed to get off the
ground
oh darling beginning don't like
beginning
everyone's just staring at this one guy
on his laptop like
oh he's running a pie thank command
gotta love pi like python3
you must be making a plot with
matplotlib this is like fascinating to
see there's all the same tools that i
use like being used by
a completely different science team to
do completely different science this is
how cool like coding is that it's that
flexible
oh he looks like he's staring intently
at a graph
he's got graphs show us the graphs
everything's healthy but show us
the altitude pop the flight control
confirming that we have
evrs from ingenuity engineers reporting
having performed spin up takeoff
slime hover
descent landing touchdown
yes it confirmed that it's done all the
things that it was supposed to
spun up its blades took off hovered spun
down
and landed safely i guess landing safely
is also a key thing to fly as well
everyone's celebrating
there's the graph i wanted to see look
at that
no bring it back bring back in the graph
break break the giraffe
you can just see it's kind of
overexposed but you can see the flat
line where it hovered at the top and
then came back down again and landed
safely
oh that's so good to see oh i can see
black and white photos on his screen in
the bottom right
hand corner so they've obviously got
photos from
looking down on the underneath of
ingenuity that's where the black and
white camera is looking down at the
surface
i don't know if we're gonna get the sort
of horizon view yet from the side of the
drone
um but we're definitely getting the
black and white stuff okay show me
you're showing people clapping show me
the picture
there it is you can see the shadow of
the drone on the surface
oh that's so cool i mean that'll make
this look so easy right but it really
isn't like the coordination of so many
engineers and physicists and nasa
employees to actually make
this happen and figure out flight in a
martian atmosphere when you can't
properly test it on earth
and then bring back a photo like that
i mean come on that's amazing
oh okay so they're waiting for the
perseverance of it if it's
really cool to see perseverance's view
of ingenuity taking off
okay they're all they're all clumping
again
oh there's a video oh yeah
look that's so cool it shifts around
show us again show us again
i think she's currently ripping up some
speech she wrote in case it didn't work
there it goes look at it girl proper
hovers as well that's incredible
so that's just a set of images from
perseverance taking back to back and
they're playing almost like a gif right
so it's not like a high definition movie
so that the frames are really
faced apart so it's like sort of jumping
around loads
but it's just so amazing to see
like flight on another planet
there you have it it was a success and
we saw that from a couple of different
things first of all was the altitude
graph that they showed which showed the
height of ingenuity above the surface of
mars and you can see this sort of very
quick
ramp up to that hover where it stayed
roughly level before coming back down
then there was the image from the
underside
of the helicopter looking downwards and
actually seeing the
shadow of ingenuity on the surface
of mars and then we also had the images
from perseverance as well which were
taken in quick succession it wasn't
quite a video it's
more of a gif you can think of it as of
the rotor blades spinning up
of ingenuity actually hovering above the
ground and then coming back down again
as well which was just
great to see you know looking at a graph
of an altitude is is great you know
that's what it recorded but actually
seeing it hover off the ground is
something else special
entirely and you know with those images
you know it was really just
another milestone of space exploration
that was hit so what's next for
ingenuity well ingenuity was always
supposed to be
just a technology demonstration
essentially a proof of concept that you
could actually achieve fly in the
martian atmosphere
so we'll actually spend the next 30 days
sort of pushing itself to the limits
finding out how far
it can go how high it can go and what
are the limitations of flight on mars in
this different atmosphere and different
gravitational
system perseverance will stick close to
it during that time as well sort of
recording what it
sees in any issues as well before after
30 days engineer seal tops back down and
perseverance will then
rove away leaving it behind to carry on
its
scientific mission of taking more
samples from the surface of mars and
looking for these signs
of life so it's pretty quickly going to
be job done for ingenuity and it's going
to join the ranks of you know other
robots and space exploration missions
that have been left on the surface of
mars
after that job was complete but in that
next 30 day period we are gonna get
so many images and it will be video
footage
as well of it flying around mars and i
cannot wait because everybody loves a
drone shop right especially travel
vloggers
then it's like nasa just said to them
you know i see your shot of the
incredible australian coastline
and i raise you mars
you